docs/activities/celestial_sphere.md, before:

## Check Your Understanding

<quiz>

You walk outside and turn so you are facing due North. 
Your zenith is:

- [ ] Directly in front of you
- [ ] Straight out to your right
- [ ] Directly behind you
- [ ] Straight out to your left
- [x] Directly overhead

</quiz>

<quiz>

You walk outside and turn so you are facing due North. 
South is:

- [ ] Directly in front of you
- [ ] Straight out to your right
- [x] Directly behind you
- [ ] Straight out to your left
- [ ] Directly overhead

</quiz>



<quiz>

Where in the diagram would you label North?  

![An observer on Earth faces to the left of the local sky dome. A is directly overhead. B marks Polaris on the upper left edge of the dome. C marks the horizon at the back of the diagram. D is the horizon's the leftmost point. E is the horizon's rightmost point.](img/celestial-sphere-local-diagram.jpg)

- [ ] Position A
- [ ] Position B
- [ ] Position C
- [x] Position D
- [ ] Position E

The North direction is on the horizon, directly underneath Polaris.

</quiz>



## Discussion

Chose an astronomical object you can see easily in the sky today - the Sun, the Moon, a bright star, perhaps one of the planets ([Planets visible in your sky tonight](https://www.timeanddate.com/astronomy/night/).) Observe it **twice**, ideally half an hour to a few hours apart.

1. Describe its location in the sky using our categories for Altitude and Azimuth in the [Celestial Module](../modules/celestial_sphere.md).
2. Describe any change in location from one time to another.
3. Based on your observation, does this object behave like it is fixed on the Celestial Sphere? Why or why not?

Commit message:

daily motion, revise celestial sphere activities

docs/activities/celestial_sphere.md, after:

## Check Your Understanding

<quiz>

You walk outside and turn so you are facing due North. 
Your zenith is:

- [ ] Directly in front of you
- [ ] Straight out to your right
- [ ] Directly behind you
- [ ] Straight out to your left
- [x] Directly overhead

</quiz>

<quiz>

You walk outside and turn so you are facing due North. 
South is:

- [ ] Directly in front of you
- [ ] Straight out to your right
- [x] Directly behind you
- [ ] Straight out to your left
- [ ] Directly overhead

</quiz>



<quiz>

Where in the diagram would you label North?  

![An observer on Earth faces to the left of the local sky dome. A is directly overhead. B marks Polaris on the upper left edge of the dome. C marks the horizon at the back of the diagram. D is the horizon's the leftmost point. E is the horizon's rightmost point.](../img/celestial-sphere-local-diagram.jpg)

- [ ] Position A
- [ ] Position B
- [ ] Position C
- [x] Position D
- [ ] Position E

The North direction is on the horizon, directly underneath Polaris.

</quiz>

<quiz>

You look to see the sun in the early evening. It's a few sun-heights above the horizon. You describe it as: (choose two)  
![A photograph of the evening sun, reflected in the water.](../img/evening-sun.jpg)

- [ ] High
- [x] Low 
- [ ] In the Northern Sky
- [ ] In the Eastern Sky
- [ ] In the Southern Sky
- [x] In the Western Sky

Since this is closer to the horizon than to the zenith, it is low in the sky. Since it's evening, the sun about to set in the West, so it's in the Western sky.

</quiz>

## Activities and Discussion

### Lecture Tutorial

Work through the Position Lecture Tutorial on pages 1-2 of your book. Read carefully, and discuss any questions with your group. Make sure you check agreement on Question 8!

### Fieldwork

Chose an astronomical object you can find easily in the sky this week - the Sun, the Moon, a bright star, perhaps one of the [planets visible in your sky tonight](https://www.timeanddate.com/astronomy/night/), located using a [skymap](https://nightsky.jpl.nasa.gov/news/212/) or [night sky guide](https://nightsky.jpl.nasa.gov/planner/). 

Observe the object **twice** in one day, ideally half an hour to a few hours apart.

1. Describe its location in the sky using our categories for Altitude and Azimuth in the [Celestial Sphere Module](../modules/celestial_sphere.md).
2. Describe any change in location from one time to another.
3. Based on your observation, does this object behave like it is fixed on the Celestial Sphere? Why or why not?
