docs/modules/celestial_sphere.md, before:

# The Celestial Sphere

The Celestial Sphere describes a model of our view of the Universe. You'll learn about constellations, directions in the sky, and how the rotation of the Celestial Sphere looks from here on Earth.

This article is written for observers in Fullerton, California.

We'll discuss how a map of the sky, like the one shown below, relates to what you can see in the sky.
![A map of the night sky: a circle filled with constellations and labelled planets](img/skymap-January2026.jpg)
*Monthly skymaps in pdf from [skymaps.com](https://www.skymaps.com/downloads.html) or images shared by [Kym @ The Evening Sky Map](https://skymaps.com/bsky/).*

What you need to know:

* How to measure angles in degrees. [Angles Review from Math is Fun](https://www.mathsisfun.com/geometry/degrees.html).




## Patterns in the Sky

For human observers, the stars appear in **fixed patterns in the sky**.


You might recognize the pattern of the stars in Vincent van Gogh's *Starry Night Over the Rhône*, which was painted in 1888:  
![A nighttime riverside scene with a dark blue sky filled with bright yellow stars and street lamps reflected in the Rhône River.](img/Vincent_van_Gogh_-_Starry_Night_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg)  
*[Source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Vincent_van_Gogh_-_Starry_Night_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg)*

You might know it today as the Big Dipper, a part of the constellation Ursa Major.  
![A night sky photograph showing the stars of the big dipper.](img/big-dipper-today.jpg)  
*[Source: Acadia Photo Safari](https://www.acadiaphotosafari.com/blog/2013/10/3/big-dipper-over-bubbles)*  
![A part of a sky map showing the stars of the big dipper.](img/Ursa_Major_constellation_detail_map.png)  
*[Source: Torsten Bronger](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ursa_Major_constellation_map.png)*

This same pattern appears in texts written by human observers over a thousand years ago.

- The Dunhuang star map, from around 700 AD:    
![A star map on silk, depicting stars as dots connected into patterns with lines, annotated in classical Chinese calligraphy.](img/Dunhuang_star_map_crop.jpg)  
*[Source](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dunhuang_star_map.jpg)*

- The *Book of Fixed Stars* from around 964 AD:  
![A drawing of a bear with stars marked as red and black dots and labeled in Arabic.](img/Al_Sufi_-_Book_of_Fixed_Stars_-_Ursa_Major_(The_Great_Bear)_-_Bodleian_Library_-_Marsh_144_crop.jpg)
*[Source](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Al_Sufi_-_Book_of_Fixed_Stars_-_Ursa_Major_(The_Great_Bear)_-_Bodleian_Library_-_Marsh_144.jpg)*

All around the world, observers notice the same patterns,
but tell their own stories:  
![The same stars as the Greek Orion, Aztec New Fire, Navajo First Slim One, and Hawaiian Cat's Cradle](img/orion-stories.jpg)  
*Sources: [Stellarium](https://stellarium.org/), [NASA/STScI](https://science.nasa.gov/universe/discovering-the-universe-through-the-constellation-orion/)*

## Constellations

In modern Astronomy, constellations are how we identify and name **regions of the sky** - NOT the patterns of the stars themselves. 

The constellation Orion is everything in the highlighted region in this sky map:  
![A sky map highlighting the constellation Orion, with labels on its bright stars and on neighboring constellations.](img/constellation-orion.png)  
*[Source: IAU, Sky and Telescope](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orion_IAU.svg)*

Stars in constellations **appear** to be side-by-side, but they can be at very **different distances** from the Earth.  
![The earth, with lines-of-sight through a sideways sky image of Orion to several stars at different distances](img/orion-stars-distances.jpg)

The red star Betelgeuse on Orion's "shoulder" is 650 light years away, but the purplish glowing Nebula M42 in the "sword" is 1,344 light years away. So Betelgeuse is closer to us than it is the nebula.  
![Betelgeuse imaged is a red glowing blob](img/betelgeuse-image.jpg)
![The Orion nebula is a hazy purple glow with bright stars at the core](img/orion-nebula-visible-light.jpg)  
Sources: [Dupree and Gililand, CfA/STScI/NASA/ESA](https://esahubble.org/images/opo9604b/) and [Filip Loic](https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/multimedia/search/image/3834)

## The Dome of the Sky

![Part of a panorama of the playa of Death Valley at night. The Milky way is visible as an arc across the sky.](img/Deathvalleysky_nps_crop.jpg)  
*[Source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Deathvalleysky_nps_big.jpg)*

When we look at the night sky they seem to be sprinkled on a dome over our heads.

This is an optical illusion because we lack depth perception for such distant objects.

## Directions in the Sky

If you look to any side, you see the **Horizon**. This is where the sky appears to meet the most distant part of the ground you can see.

### Horizon examples:

![A view of the sunset. The horizon is labeled at the tops of some distant mountains.](img/horizon-sunset.jpg)
![The Milky way is seen glowing in the sky over many telescopes illuminated in red light. The horizon is labeled where the dark ground meets the sky.](img/horizon-starparty.jpg)

### Ground to sky:

**North, East, South,** and **West** mark the directions you would travel out toward the horizon. They are the same directions you use to orient a map.


![An animation showing a map with directions N E W S turning into the ground of a figure standing with a sky dome above it. The top of the dome is labeled Zenith.](img/horizon-zenith-directions.gif)

If you look directly overhead, you see the **Zenith**. This is the "top" of the dome.

### Altitude, Azimuth, Meridian

We locate regions in the sky by **azimuth** (angle around the horizon) and  **altitude** (angle above the horizon).

![An observer with their local sky labeled as described below.](img/localsky-directions.png)

First you find the azimuth on the horizon. Which direction do you face? For example: North, East, South, or West. 

Then, you look up from the horizon to find altitude:

* On the Horizon (0°)
* Low in the sky (less than 45° up from the horizon)
* High in the sky (more than 45° up from the horizon)
* Zenith (directly overhead, 90° up from the horizon)

For example: the GPS satellite passes overhead:
from far away in the Northwest, 
to the Zenith, to far away in the Southeast.  
![An animation showing the path described above](img/satellite-overhead.gif)

### Polaris, the North Star

Polaris is seen directly above the North point of the horizon in the Northern Hemisphere.

In Fullerton, we see Polaris at an altitude of 34° above the horizon.

![The local sky with North to the back, with polaris above the North point of the horizon and below the Zenith](img/polaris-local-sky.jpg)

You can find Polaris from nearby star patterns - it's between the stars of the Big Dipper and the W-shaped Casseopeia.

![The W of Casseopeia points to the North Star from one side, the dipping edge of the Big Dipper from the other](img/Dipper_polaris_cass.jpg)

### The Sun and the Meridian

The sun rises in the East, 
moves high in the Southern sky,
and sets in the West. Its path makes an arc across the sky.  
![An animation with an observer facing South showing the Sun rising near East, arcing across the sky, and setting near West. A dotted line traces the Sun's path. A second line divides the sky from North to South.](img/sun-local-sky.gif)


We also divide the sky by the **meridian**, a line going from the North point of the hoizon to the South point.

This is where we get a.m. (ante meridian, before meridian) and p.m. (post meridian, after meridian).


## The Celestial Sphere

Each night, the stars appear to move.

Looking North toward Polaris, the stars rotate around it.

Polaris Time Lapse video:  
<div style="padding:66.54% 0 0 0;position:relative;">
<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/4330429?badge=0&amp;autopause=0&amp;player_id=0&amp;app_id=58479" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;" title="Polaris time lapse"></iframe></div><script src="https://player.vimeo.com/api/player.js"></script>

This makes it seem like the stars are all on the surface of a spinning ball around us.

Animation of the Celestial Sphere: *[Source: Science Sims @ CCNY](https://sciencesims.com/simdocs/celestial-sphere)*
<iframe src="https://ccny-physics-sims.github.io/sims/celestial-sphere/" width ="400" height="400" ></iframe >

Many early astronomers imagined that stars were really fixed on the surface of a Celestial Sphere that surrounded and revolved around the Earth.

![A globe-style model of the celestial sphere sitting on a desk.](img/celestial-sphere-globe-model.jpg)

* The celestial sphere is a scientific model.

* We now know it is not how things really are. 

* It’s still a useful way to map the position and motion of the stars in our sky.

### Features of the Celestial Sphere Model

The Celestial Sphere surrounds the Earth. 

* The stars are in fixed positions on the sphere.

* The North Celestial Pole is directly above Earth's North Pole.  
![An arrow from Earth's North pole stretched directly up to the North Celestial Sphere, and Polaris.](img/celestial-sphere-north-pole.jpg)

* The Celestial Equator is directly above Earth's equator.  
![An line marking Earth's Equator is shown with a red ellipse estending out from it to the Celestial Equator.](img/celestial-sphere-equator.jpg)

## The Celestial Sphere and your Local Sky

Your Local Sky is half of the celestial sphere; the half that is above your local horizon

* Your zenith is directly above your location on Earth. Your horizon is 90° from your zenith. The North Celestial Pole and Celestial Equator are tilted in your sky.
![An observer stands on Earth. Your Zenith and Your Horizon are directly above and to the side. The North Celestial Pole and the Celestial Equator are tilted.](img/celestial-sphere-observer-zenith-horizon.jpg)

* The North point of your horizon is directly beneath the North Celestial Pole. Your meridian runs from North, through the Zenith, to South on the opposite side of the horizon. East and West are to the left and the right if facing South.
![An line marking Earth's Equator is shown with a red ellipse estending out from it to the Celestial Equator.](img/celestial-sphere-observer-north-meridian-south.jpg)

## The Rotating Sphere
In the Celestial Sphere model, the Earth is fixed and the Celestial Sphere rotates.

![asdfa](img/rotating-celestial-sphere.gif)

* It rotates around the Polar axis from East to West
    - An axis through the North Celestial Pole (Polaris, the North Star)

* It makes a complete rotation once every day. 

* Each star completes a full circle path every 24 hours.

##

Commit message:

finished out celestial sphere notes, started activities

docs/modules/celestial_sphere.md, after:

# The Celestial Sphere

The Celestial Sphere describes a model of our view of the Universe. You'll learn about constellations, directions in the sky, and how the rotation of the Celestial Sphere looks from here on Earth.

* Note: This article is written for observers in Fullerton, California.*


What you need to know:

* How to measure angles in degrees. [Angles Review from Math is Fun](https://www.mathsisfun.com/geometry/degrees.html).



We'll discuss how a map of the sky, like the one shown below, relates to what you can see in the sky.
![A map of the night sky: a circle filled with constellations and labelled planets](img/skymap-January2026.jpg)
*Monthly skymaps in pdf from [skymaps.com](https://www.skymaps.com/downloads.html) or images shared by [Kym @ The Evening Sky Map](https://skymaps.com/bsky/).*

## Patterns in the Sky

For human observers, the stars appear in **fixed patterns in the sky**.

You might recognize the pattern of the stars in Vincent van Gogh's *Starry Night Over the Rhône*, which was painted in 1888:  
![A nighttime riverside scene with a dark blue sky filled with bright yellow stars and street lamps reflected in the Rhône River.](img/Vincent_van_Gogh_-_Starry_Night_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg)  
*[Source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Vincent_van_Gogh_-_Starry_Night_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg)*

You might know it today as the Big Dipper, a part of the constellation Ursa Major.  
![A night sky photograph showing the stars of the big dipper.](img/big-dipper-today.jpg)  
*[Source: Acadia Photo Safari](https://www.acadiaphotosafari.com/blog/2013/10/3/big-dipper-over-bubbles)*  
![A part of a sky map showing the stars of the big dipper.](img/Ursa_Major_constellation_detail_map.png)  
*[Source: Torsten Bronger](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ursa_Major_constellation_map.png)*

This same pattern appears in texts written by human observers over a thousand years ago.

- The Dunhuang star map, from around 700 AD:    
![A star map on silk, depicting stars as dots connected into patterns with lines, annotated in classical Chinese calligraphy.](img/Dunhuang_star_map_crop.jpg)  
*[Source](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dunhuang_star_map.jpg)*

- The *Book of Fixed Stars* from around 964 AD:  
![A drawing of a bear with stars marked as red and black dots and labeled in Arabic.](img/Al_Sufi_-_Book_of_Fixed_Stars_-_Ursa_Major_(The_Great_Bear)_-_Bodleian_Library_-_Marsh_144_crop.jpg)
*[Source](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Al_Sufi_-_Book_of_Fixed_Stars_-_Ursa_Major_(The_Great_Bear)_-_Bodleian_Library_-_Marsh_144.jpg)*

All around the world, observers notice the same patterns,
but tell their own stories:  
![The same stars as the Greek Orion, Aztec New Fire, Navajo First Slim One, and Hawaiian Cat's Cradle](img/orion-stories.jpg)  
*Sources: [Stellarium](https://stellarium.org/), [NASA/STScI](https://science.nasa.gov/universe/discovering-the-universe-through-the-constellation-orion/)*

## Constellations

In modern Astronomy, constellations are how we identify and name **regions of the sky** - NOT the patterns of the stars themselves. 

The constellation Orion is everything in the highlighted region in this sky map:  
![A sky map highlighting the constellation Orion, with labels on its bright stars and on neighboring constellations.](img/constellation-orion.png)  
*[Source: IAU, Sky and Telescope](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orion_IAU.svg)*

Stars in constellations **appear** to be side-by-side, but they can be at very **different distances** from the Earth.  
![The earth, with lines-of-sight through a sideways sky image of Orion to several stars at different distances](img/orion-stars-distances.jpg)

The red star Betelgeuse on Orion's "shoulder" is 650 light years away, but the purplish glowing Nebula M42 in the "sword" is 1,344 light years away. So Betelgeuse is closer to us than it is the nebula.  
![Betelgeuse imaged is a red glowing blob](img/betelgeuse-image.jpg)
![The Orion nebula is a hazy purple glow with bright stars at the core](img/orion-nebula-visible-light.jpg)  
Sources: [Dupree and Gililand, CfA/STScI/NASA/ESA](https://esahubble.org/images/opo9604b/) and [Filip Loic](https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/multimedia/search/image/3834)

## The Dome of the Sky

![Part of a panorama of the playa of Death Valley at night. The Milky way is visible as an arc across the sky.](img/Deathvalleysky_nps_crop.jpg)  
*[Source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Deathvalleysky_nps_big.jpg)*

When we look at the night sky they seem to be sprinkled on a dome over our heads.

This is an optical illusion because we lack depth perception for such distant objects.

## Directions in the Sky

If you look to any side, you see the **Horizon**. This is where the sky appears to meet the most distant part of the ground you can see.

### Horizon examples:

![A view of the sunset. The horizon is labeled at the tops of some distant mountains.](img/horizon-sunset.jpg)
![The Milky way is seen glowing in the sky over many telescopes illuminated in red light. The horizon is labeled where the dark ground meets the sky.](img/horizon-starparty.jpg)

### Ground to sky:

**North, East, South,** and **West** mark the directions you would travel out toward the horizon. They are the same directions you use to orient a map.


![An animation showing a map with directions N E W S turning into the ground of a figure standing with a sky dome above it. The top of the dome is labeled Zenith.](img/horizon-zenith-directions.gif)

If you look directly overhead, you see the **Zenith**. This is the "top" of the dome.

### Altitude, Azimuth, Meridian

We locate regions in the sky by **azimuth** (angle around the horizon) and  **altitude** (angle above the horizon).

![An observer with their local sky labeled as described below.](img/localsky-directions.png)

First you find the azimuth on the horizon. Which direction do you face? For example: North, East, South, or West. 

Then, you look up from the horizon to find altitude:

* On the Horizon (0°)
* Low in the sky (less than 45° up from the horizon)
* High in the sky (more than 45° up from the horizon)
* Zenith (directly overhead, 90° up from the horizon)

For example: the GPS satellite passes overhead:
from far away in the Northwest, 
to the Zenith, to far away in the Southeast.  
![An animation showing the path described above](img/satellite-overhead.gif)

### Polaris, the North Star

Polaris is seen directly above the North point of the horizon in the Northern Hemisphere.

In Fullerton, we see Polaris at an altitude of 34° above the horizon.

![The local sky with North to the back, with polaris above the North point of the horizon and below the Zenith](img/polaris-local-sky.jpg)

You can find Polaris from nearby star patterns - it's between the stars of the Big Dipper and the W-shaped Casseopeia.

![The W of Casseopeia points to the North Star from one side, the dipping edge of the Big Dipper from the other](img/Dipper_polaris_cass.jpg)

### The Sun and the Meridian

The sun rises in the East, 
moves high in the Southern sky,
and sets in the West. Its path makes an arc across the sky.  
![An animation with an observer facing South showing the Sun rising near East, arcing across the sky, and setting near West. A dotted line traces the Sun's path. A second line divides the sky from North to South.](img/sun-local-sky.gif)


We also divide the sky by the **meridian**, a line going from the North point of the hoizon to the South point.

This is where we get a.m. (ante meridian, before meridian) and p.m. (post meridian, after meridian).


## The Celestial Sphere

Each night, the stars appear to move.

Looking North toward Polaris, the stars rotate around it.

Polaris Time Lapse video:  
<div style="padding:66.54% 0 0 0;position:relative;">
<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/4330429?badge=0&amp;autopause=0&amp;player_id=0&amp;app_id=58479" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;" title="Polaris time lapse"></iframe></div><script src="https://player.vimeo.com/api/player.js"></script>

This makes it seem like the stars are all on the surface of a spinning ball around us.

Animation of the Celestial Sphere: *[Source: Science Sims @ CCNY](https://sciencesims.com/simdocs/celestial-sphere)*
<iframe src="https://ccny-physics-sims.github.io/sims/celestial-sphere/" width ="400" height="400" ></iframe >

Many early astronomers imagined that stars were really fixed on the surface of a Celestial Sphere that surrounded and revolved around the Earth.

![A globe-style model of the celestial sphere sitting on a desk.](img/celestial-sphere-globe-model.jpg)

* The celestial sphere is a scientific model.

* We now know it is not how things really are. 

* It’s still a useful way to map the position and motion of the stars in our sky.

### Features of the Celestial Sphere Model

The Celestial Sphere surrounds the Earth. 

* The stars are in fixed positions on the sphere.

* The North Celestial Pole is directly above Earth's North Pole.  
![An arrow from Earth's North pole stretched directly up to the North Celestial Sphere, and Polaris.](img/celestial-sphere-north-pole.jpg)

* The Celestial Equator is directly above Earth's equator.  
![An line marking Earth's Equator is shown with a red ellipse estending out from it to the Celestial Equator.](img/celestial-sphere-equator.jpg)

## The Celestial Sphere and your Local Sky

Your Local Sky is half of the celestial sphere; the half that is above your local horizon

* Your zenith is directly above your location on Earth. Your horizon is 90° from your zenith. The North Celestial Pole and Celestial Equator are tilted in your sky.
![An observer stands on Earth. Your Zenith and Your Horizon are directly above and to the side. The North Celestial Pole and the Celestial Equator are tilted.](img/celestial-sphere-observer-zenith-horizon.jpg)

* The North point of your horizon is directly beneath the North Celestial Pole. Your meridian runs from North, through the Zenith, to South on the opposite side of the horizon. East and West are to the left and the right if facing South.
![An line marking Earth's Equator is shown with a red ellipse estending out from it to the Celestial Equator.](img/celestial-sphere-observer-north-meridian-south.jpg)

## The Rotating Sphere
In the Celestial Sphere model, the Earth is fixed and the Celestial Sphere rotates.

![asdfa](img/rotating-celestial-sphere.gif)

* It rotates around the Polar axis from East to West
    - An axis through the North Celestial Pole (Polaris, the North Star)

* It makes a complete rotation once every day. 

* Each star completes a full circle path every 24 hours.


## Activities

Go to the [Activities Page for this lecture](../activities/celestial_sphere.md).

## Go Further

Ideas from this lecture are used in the [The Rotating Sky
Lab](https://astro.unl.edu/naap/motion2/motion2.html).
